---
title: "QC and evaluation of long read data"
teaching: 30
exercises: 60-90
questions:
- "How to determine basic statistics on read sets"
- "What do these statistics mean: are they good or bad?"
- "What are read technology specific errors?"  
objectives:
- "Learn how to get and interpret read set statistics"
- "Evaluate read technology specific errors based on read mappings"
keypoints:
- "PacBio and Nanopore have read lengths of many kilobases"
- "In practice quality of input DNA, library prep. and many other factors will determine read length distribution"
- "PacBio and Nanopore have different types of errors"
apps:
- "assembly-stats" 
- "minimap2"
- "./tools/Tablet/tablet"
---

## Introduction

Quality control of input data is an important task in any data analysis and is very much true for de novo assemblies. Biases, high error reads and other unexpected properties will have an impact on the resulting contigs by producing fragmented assemblies and/or chimeric contigs. In this session we will have a closer look at our input data before we continue with the assembly process.
 
## Read statistics

For basic the quality control of the read sets we use assembly-stats:
~~~
{{site.vm_prompt}}assembly-stats 
usage: stats [options] <list of fasta/q files>

Reports sequence length statistics from fasta and/or fastq files

options:
-l <int>
	Minimum length cutoff for each sequence.
	Sequences shorter than the cutoff will be ignored [1]
-s
	Print 'grep friendly' output
-t
	Print tab-delimited output
-u
	Print tab-delimited output with no header line
-v
	Print version and exit
~~~
{: .bash}

This tool will report to the terminal information like average sequence length and N50. 

> ## Read statistics
> The PacBio reads are in this file: data/raw_data/pacbio_reads.fasta.
> Get the read statistics on this data set and try to interpret the results: what does each of the entries mean?
> > ## Solution
> > ~~~
> > {{site.vm_prompt}}assembly-stats data/raw_data/pacbio_reads.fasta 
> > stats for data/raw_data/pacbio_reads.fasta
> > sum = 48280339, n = 3862, ave = 12501.38, largest = 70567
> > N50 = 19571, n = 840
> > N60 = 16667, n = 1107
> > N70 = 13410, n = 1427
> > N80 = 10361, n = 1833
> > N90 = 6819, n = 2399
> > N100 = 74, n = 3862
> > N_count = 0
> > Gaps = 0
> > ~~~
> > {: .bash}
> {: .solution}
> The Nanopore reads are in this file: data/raw_data/nanopore_reads.fastq. Also check the statistics of the Nanopore data.
> > ## Solution
> > ~~~
> > {{site.vm_prompt}}assembly-stats data/raw_data/nanopore_reads.fastq 
> > stats for data/raw_data/nanopore_reads.fastq
> > sum = 20742020, n = 1449, ave = 14314.71, largest = 73689
> > N50 = 22393, n = 324
> > N60 = 19386, n = 424
> > N70 = 15673, n = 544
> > N80 = 12226, n = 694
> > N90 = 7987, n = 900
> > N100 = 384, n = 1449
> > N_count = 0
> > Gaps = 0
> > ~~~
> > {: .bash}
> {: .solution}
> Discuss the difference between the two platforms.
{: .challenge}

## Aligning the reads to the reference genome

A further visual inspection of the data can be done by mapping the reads to the reference genome. For each platform many tools exist to help you with this. We will focus on the newest and/or most commonly used tools.
The alignments will give you ideas on SNP rates, biases in the data, heterozygosity and error rates.

> ## The reference genome 
> The reads are from the kiwifruit. We can expect that the reads have high similarity when compare to this genome. However, some issues have to be taken into account when mapping reads to a genome. Discuss what effect will be of the following issues when looking at the mapped reads:
> 
> 1. The genome of the organism is not known. You will have to map the reads to the genome of a relative.  
> 2. Your reference genome is highly repetitive.
> 3. Your reference genome is not nearly complete.
> 4. You have a polyploid organism.
> 5. You are faced with issues 2-5
{: .challenge}

For mapping the reads we will use [minimap2](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2/blob/master/README.md):
~~~
minimap2
~~~
{: .bash}

And a 1MB region of our cultivar (assembled earlier):
~~~
./data/references/reference1MB.fasta
~~~
{: .bash}
 

> ## Mapping reads
> Use minimap2 to map the two read sets to our region of 1MB. The PacBio data:
> ~~~
> ./data/pacbio.fasta
> ~~~
> {: .bash}
> The nanopore data:
> ~~~
> ./data/nanopore.fasta
> ~~~
> {: .bash}
> Run minimap2 without arguments to see which options you can use. For subsequent steps you need SAM output. 
> > ## Solution
> > ~~~
> > mkdir results
> > minimap2 -x map-pb -a ./data/references/reference1MB.fasta ./data/pacbio_reads.fasta > results/pacbio_reads.sam
> > minimap2 -a -x map-ont ./data/references/reference1MB.fasta ./data/raw_data/nanopore_reads.fastq > results/nanopore.sam
> > ~~~
> > {: .bash}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Visualizing the results
> Tablet is a nice and compact SAM/BAM viewer. It is written in Java and it runs on most systems.
> ~~~
> ./tools/Tablet/tablet
> ~~~
> {: .bash}
> Open Tablet and load the reference plus a SAM file. For each of the three results files, visually check:
> 
> 1. The number of mismatches, insertions and deletions (Tablet supports different **Color schemes** to help with this).
> 2. Coverage across the region
> 
> Discuss the differences between the two results. For example:
> 
> 1. What type of errors do you see? 
> 2. How many of them?
> 3. What will be the likely impact on the assembly?
{: .challenge}

> ## Kiwifruit reference genome
> Our cultivar is a diploid plant with two clear haplotypes.
> Discuss based on the mapping results:
> 
> 1. Most obvious differences between the mapping results.
> 2. The reference sequences is a collapsed haplotype. What is the impact of this on the mapping results? 
> 3. Do you see any differences in mapping information for each of the sequencing platforms? 
> 4. After assembly, with what be key differences between the assemblied sequences and the kiwifruit genome?
> 5. Why would you need either HiFi PacBio / High quality base calling Nanopore and not (much longer) PacBio subreads / basic quality base calling Nanopore?
> 6. Kiwi has a diploid genome. What are issues that you might encounter when sequencing and assembling a metagenomics sample?
{: .challenge}
